#Policies as Blockchain Smart Contracts for Ensuring Compliance and Provenance: A Healthcare Industry Perspective

Access to electronic health records (EHR) is very heavily regulated through many different types of policies -- federal level policies (such as HIPAA and HITECH), state-level statutes (such as in Colorado, The Colorado Revised Statutes Article 25), and even local and organizational level policies (that may, for example, include procedures to follow at the organization level to ensure compliance with other policies). In addition, individual patients may also establish contracts with their healthcare providers to express their own policies related to access to or sharing of their respective records. When such policies are adequately specified and implemented, they go a long way toward protecting EHR data. However, research has shown that there are often significant problems or gaps in policy specification and implementation that are not identified until after a breach has occurred. Further, a recent study shows that subcultures within a healthcare organization influence whether employees violate policies, perhaps unintentionally. These observations motivate us to revisit the compliance and provenance aspects of policies. We propose using smart contracts to implement policies. Contracts ensure that policies are enforced. The immutable storage property of blockchains in smart contracts, together with the strong integrity guarantees, ensure that an adequate trail of policy compliance (or non-compliance) is maintained, thus facilitating provenance. Further, the distributed consensus-based trust accorded by blockchains and smart contracts is a practical implementation of the concept of reference monitors, which is one of the most important requirements for policy compliance.
